<?xml version="1.0" encoding="utf-8"?>
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" xmlns:epub="http://www.idpf.org/2007/ops" epub:prefix="z3998: http://www.daisy.org/z3998/2012/vocab/structure/, se: https://standardebooks.org/vocab/1.0" xml:lang="en-US">
	<head>
		<title>VII</title>
		<link href="../css/core.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
		<link href="../css/local.css" rel="stylesheet" type="text/css"/>
	</head>
	<body epub:type="bodymatter z3998:fiction">
		<section id="chapter-7" epub:type="chapter">
			<h2><a id="id_7">CHAPTER</a> VII.</h2>
			<p class="head">A String Of Surprises.</p>
			<p>The extremely delicate tints of Edith’s costume led me to remark that the color effects of the modern dress seemed to be in general very light as compared with those which prevailed in my day.</p>
			<p>“The result,” I said, “is extremely pleasing, but if you will excuse a rather prosaic suggestion, it occurs to me that with the whole nation given over to wearing these delicate schemes of color, the accounts for washing must be pretty large. I should suppose they would swamp the national treasury if laundry bills are anything like what they used to be.”</p>
			<p>This remark, which I thought a very sensible one, set Edith to laughing. “Doubtless we could not do much else if we washed our clothes,” she said; “but you see we do not wash them.”</p>
			<p>“Not wash them!⁠—why not?”</p>
			<p>“Because we don’t think it nice to wear clothes again after they have been so much soiled as to need washing.”</p>
			<p>“Well, I won’t say that I am surprised,” I replied; “in fact, I think I am no longer capable of being surprised at anything; but perhaps you will kindly tell me what you do with a dress when it becomes soiled.”</p>
			<p>“We throw it away⁠—that is, it goes back to the mills to be made into something else.”</p>
			<p>“Indeed! To my nineteenth-century intellect, throwing away clothing would seem even more expensive than washing it.”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no, much less so. What do you suppose, now, this costume of mine cost?”</p>
			<p>“I don’t know, I am sure. I never had a wife to pay dressmaker’s bills for, but I should say certainly it cost a great deal of money.”</p>
			<p>“Such costumes cost from ten to twenty cents,” said Edith. “What do you suppose it is made of?”</p>
			<p>I took the edge of her mantle between my fingers.</p>
			<p>“I thought it was silk or fine linen,” I replied, “but I see it is not. Doubtless it is some new fiber.”</p>
			<p>“We have discovered many new fibers, but it is rather a question of process than material that I had in mind. This is not a textile fabric at all, but paper. That is the most common material for garments nowadays.”</p>
			<p>“But⁠—but,” I exclaimed, “what if it should come on to rain on these paper clothes? Would they not melt, and at a little strain would they not part?”</p>
			<p>“A costume such as this,” said Edith, “is not meant for stormy weather, and yet it would by no means melt in a rainstorm, however severe. For storm-garments we have a paper that is absolutely impervious to moisture on the outer surface. As to toughness, I think you would find it as hard to tear this paper as any ordinary cloth. The fabric is so strengthened with fiber as to hold together very stoutly.”</p>
			<p>“But in winter, at least, when you need warmth, you must have to fall back on our old friend the sheep.”</p>
			<p>“You mean garments made of sheep’s hair? Oh, no, there is no modern use for them. Porous paper makes a garment quite as warm as woolen could, and vastly lighter than the clothes you had. Nothing but eider down could have been at once so warm and light as our winter coats of paper.”</p>
			<p>“And cotton!⁠—linen! Don’t tell me that they have been given up, like wool?”</p>
			<p>“Oh, no; we weave fabrics of these and other vegetable products, and they are nearly as cheap as paper, but paper is so much lighter and more easily fashioned into all shapes that it is generally preferred for garments. But, at any rate, we should consider no material fit for garments which could not be thrown away after being soiled. The idea of washing and cleaning articles of bodily use and using them over and over again would be quite intolerable. For this reason, while we want beautiful garments, we distinctly do not want durable ones. In your day, it seems, even worse than the practice of washing garments to be used again you were in the habit of keeping your outer garments without washing at all, not only day after day, but week after week, year after year, sometimes whole lifetimes, when they were specially valuable, and finally, perhaps, giving them away to others. It seems that women sometimes kept their wedding dresses long enough for their daughters to wear at their weddings. That would seem shocking to us, and yet, even your fine ladies did such things. As for what the poor had to do in the way of keeping and wearing their old clothes till they went to rags, that is something which won’t bear thinking of.”</p>
			<p>“It is rather startling,” I said, “to find the problem of clean clothing solved by the abolition of the wash tub, although I perceive that that was the only radical solution. ‘Warranted to wear and wash’ used to be the advertisement of our clothing merchants, but now it seems, if you would sell clothing, you must warrant the goods neither to wear nor to wash.”</p>
			<p>“As for wearing,” said Edith, “our clothing never gets the chance to show how it would wear before we throw it away, any more than the other fabrics, such as carpets, bedding, and hangings that we use about our houses.”</p>
			<p>“You don’t mean that they are paper-made also!” I exclaimed.</p>
			<p>“Not always made of paper, but always of some fabric so cheap that they can be rejected after the briefest period of using. When you would have swept a carpet we put in a new one. Where you would wash or air bedding we renew it, and so with all the hangings about our houses so far as we use them at all. We upholster with air or water instead of feathers. It is more than I can understand how you ever endured your musty, fusty, dusty rooms with the filth and disease germs of whole generations stored in the woolen and hair fabrics that furnished them. When we clean out a room we turn the hose on ceiling, walls, and floor. There is nothing to harm⁠—nothing but tiled or other hard-finished surfaces. Our hygienists say that the change in customs in these matters relating to the purity of our clothing and dwellings, has done more than all our other improvements to eradicate the germs of contagious and other diseases and relegate epidemics to ancient history.</p>
			<p>“Talking of paper,” said Edith, extending a very trim foot by way of attracting attention to its gear, “what do you think of our modern shoes?”</p>
			<p>“Do you mean that they also are made of paper?” I exclaimed.</p>
			<p>“Of course.”</p>
			<p>“I noticed the shoes your father gave me were very light as compared with anything I had ever worn before. Really that is a great idea, for lightness in foot wear is the first necessity. Scamp shoemakers used to put paper soles in shoes in my day. It is evident that instead of prosecuting them for rascals we should have revered them as unconscious prophets. But, for that matter, how do you prepare soles of paper that will last?”</p>
			<p>“There are plenty of solutions which will make paper as hard as iron.”</p>
			<p>“And do not these shoes leak in winter?”</p>
			<p>“We have different kinds for different weathers. All are seamless, and the wet-weather sort are coated outside with a lacquer impervious to moisture.”</p>
			<p>“That means, I suppose, that rubbers too as articles of wear have been sent to the museum?”</p>
			<p>“We use rubber, but not for wear. Our waterproof paper is much lighter and better every way.”</p>
			<p>“After all this it is easy to believe that your hats and caps are also paper-made.”</p>
			<p>“And so they are to a great extent,” said Edith; “the heavy headgear that made your men bald ours would not endure. We want as little as possible on our heads, and that as light as may be.”</p>
			<p>“Go on!” I exclaimed. “I suppose I am next to be told that the delicious but mysterious articles of food which come by the pneumatic carrier from the restaurant or are served there are likewise made out of paper. Proceed⁠—I am prepared to believe it!”</p>
			<p>“Not quite so bad as that,” laughed my companion, “but really the next thing to it, for the dishes you eat them from are made of paper. The crash of crockery and glass, which seems to have been a sort of running accompaniment to housekeeping in your day, is no more heard in the land. Our dishes and kettles for eating or cooking, when they need cleaning are thrown away, or rather, as in the case of all these rejected materials I have spoken of, sent back to the factories to be reduced again to pulp and made over into other forms.”</p>
			<p>“But you certainly do not use paper kettles? Fire will still burn, I fancy, although you seem to have changed most of the other rules we went by.”</p>
			<p>“Fire will still burn, indeed, but the electrical heat has been adopted for cooking as well as for all other purposes. We no longer heat our vessels from without but from within, and the consequence is that we do our cooking in paper vessels on wooden stoves, even as the savages used to do it in birch-bark vessels with hot stones, for, so the philosophers say, history repeats itself in an ever-ascending spiral.”</p>
			<p>And now Edith began to laugh at my perplexed expression. She declared that it was clear my credulity had been taxed with these accounts of modern novelties about as far as it would be prudent to try it without furnishing some further evidence of the truth of the statements she had made. She proposed accordingly, for the balance of the morning, a visit to some of the great paper-process factories.</p>
		</section>
	</body>
</html>
